:eth:

= celestia =

Entry : 2022-12-05

=== References ===
- https://research.nansen.ai/article/329/fuel-a-fresh-approach-to-scaling-blockchains

=== Notes ===

Terms
- Layers
  - consensus . Apply rules to arrive at canonical state of the chain/ledger
  - da
    - guarantees about storage, dispersal and access
    - withholding. invalid tx , advance state and no one knows how, however not uniquely Attributable, lying etc.
  - execution
  - settlement. few definitions, coordination mechanism,proof verification, dispute arbitration,secure comms layer,. ex. like RBI. token fungability,move assets between rollups. L1->L2->L1->L2
- LazyLedger/Celestia
  - ondemand consensus and DA, aka modular/deployable chains
  - itself on cosmos, stripped down consensus just validation aka DAS, maybe single slot finality??
  - tendermint however restricts validator size
  - asscociated PoS economic model, shared security, more onboarded more secure
- proofs
  - validity
  - fraud
- Nodes
  - full
  - light clients
    - only headers with proofs
    - sometimes, ethereum is refereeed to as trust minimized light client to the rollup
- Attacks
  - data hidden
  - eclipse
- DA Sampling
  - provving existencee as opposed to validity of data
  - opposed to reexecuting txs. validators check if txs were pulished to the network and if needed someone could verify aka attest to DA
  - erasure codes,data extension done correctly, celestias own fraud proofs, 
  - small download, bigger the block more efficient since squareroot law of DAS
  - 2d square stuff for erasure coding, didnt understand
  - eth uses validity proofs KZG, SNARK stuff as opposed to celestias fraud proof
- Rollup
  - SEttlement: shared execution to settle fraud and validty, 
  - Soverign : settlement + Execution, flexible, hardfork to make changes in consensus or execution env
  - Recursive : L3 settle on L2
- cevmos
  - restricted evm only for proofs aka settlement. no sc functionality
  - rollup using celestia and run your app as rollup on cevmos .L3 stuffs
- valladiums and DAC . immutable etc. DAC and associated issues, no actual stake other than repute
- Cellestium
  - C as valadium but no DAC , E is settlement
  - quantum gravity bridge
    - one way message bridge from C to E, attesting to DA
  - DAaS
  - need more time to understand intricacies
- struggling to understand
  - ordering. i cant understand how this make sense without execution
  - invalid transaction stuff, it is all recorded
Motivation
- EVM gives consensus and execution
  - limited by evm, bounded by shared social contract not very soverign
- Freedom over execution while getting consensus and DA
- da was born out of sharding. Vitamin raised
- prev security model was everyone run full node, bloat however, resource, not scalable
- entr *trust minimised* light client, should give strong security guarantees
- plentiful trust minimized blockspace
  - issues with data availability committees aka multisig
- Pluggable consensus
Components
Possible intergration
- rollup types
My opinion
- gave us the modular blockchain thesis that eth is moving towards
- but, L2 blobs, different fee market for data, needing more bridges(conflicted about this) ,fragmenting the ecosystem
- most sense for gaming, native issued assets ex. DYDX type
- no SC , how will their token bridge? wbtc model maybe, since not used as collateral limited economic security, since value accrues since yielding asset
- dunno , everyone hates landlords but secretly wants to become one
- also ethereum gives us trust minmised message passing(has execution), direct rollup rollup .V has commented on it moving between rollups. L3 article
- game of tradeoffs
- eth2 maximises for validators aka trust, celestia wants to optimize aka reduced cost to checking validators
- then apps boss people decide
ToDo
- Cosmos reading, zone, hub, no knowledge
- already entioned zk study
- celestias consensus is complicated, validators doing DAS and stuff. cant comprehend. Eth guys have more gig brains so i think they more correct



