:bankless:knowledge:justin:dope:drake:justin_drake:

= Ethereum-uncensored-with-justin-drake =

Entry : 2022-08-29

=== References ===
- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=azjpYTB7PVE 

=== Notes ===

Censorship
- PoS more susceptible?

Foundation
- Mimetic Chain :Censorship resistance --> credible neutrality --> legitimacy --> monetary premium --> Economic security and bandwidth(ex. collateral)
- Ethereum Context : Censorship resistance + Turing Completeness + Scalability = Credible Neutrality
- Scalability/Inclusion/ex. pay for gas fees/ Equal Access
- Economic Censorship:
  - EIP 1559 : dynamic block size. Gas limit twice the Gas target : 15 of 30 mil. Vast majority of gas unused. So if transaction not included in spite means censorship. Definitive way to answer
- Types
  1. Weak: Included but with delay, since whole network, rooted in block proposals, a spectrum of actors: interfaces, builders, attestors
    - defeated by technology
  2. Strong: Never included, rooted in attestations, form of 51% attack
    - Attestation
    - PoW Eth and BTC bundle Attestation and Proposing
    - Separate in PoS
      - Proposers: Include Blocks on chain
      - Attestors: Vote for what *they think* is the tip of the chain aka. participation in Fork choice Rule. Majority of Attestors chose the specific chain and that becomes the dominant one
      - Majority of Attestors can vote only for blocks not containing certain transactions. ignore and orphaning blocks
    - Build code and coordinate social layer, since the attack itself has social component
- Consensus also 2 actors: Machine and Social
- Participants
  - Searchers: Create bundles of transactions, reordering and inserting
  - Relays: Temporary cause of MEV-Boost, Enshrined PBS will resolve. Also need just Honest Non Censoring Minority meanwhile ex. Flashbots relayers open sourced
  - Interfaces: MM, AAVE, etc. Need inbrowser light clients. PoS light clients simpler than PoW
    - Light Clients
      1. Figure out tip of chain. PoS has sync committees, few BLS signatures and verification
      2. Know HEAD, now make arbitrary queries to any full node
  - Builders: Work on bundles from Searchers, order transactions optimally for fees, not proposing for inclusion
    - Will accrue all the giga chads, fancy algos and computational resources, will centralize
  - Stakers/Validators/Proposers: can build their own blocks, naive fee rules, altruistic, reduced income. However model is hybrid, if delta is significant can switch to builders
    - Proposer centralization/censorship
    - MEV smoothing: Attestors will attest blocks if they observe it to be most economically paying block, by forcing the Proposers to a binary outcome
    - Try and have a perfectly efficient market, Proposers can censor Builders via CR, so to counter
    -  Attestors observe block building market, Builders will include the block a bid that tells how much the Proposer will get if suggested block is included. they will only attest to top paying bid. Forcing Auction to be fair
  - CR Lists: Force builders to build blocks by proposing transactions the proposer thinks are censored, in blocks that are not full, thanks to EIP 1559
    - before slot of Proposer, it advertises transactions it thinks are being censored, essentially a constraint on Builders. 
    - Builders tackled by Proposers 
- 2 primary Auctions in PoS
    1. Block Auction: MEV Smoothing and Censorship Resistance
    2. Transaction: Encrypted Mempool, transaction encrypted in flight
- Divide and Conquer Strategy 
- Strong Censorship Mitigation
  - Preventative: make it very hard, 
  - Recovery: Automation then Social layer kicks in, has to be credibly neutral techniques to minimize human intervention
- Security
  - Safety: Finality Gadget, 51% attack and history written, auto slashing
  - Liveness: Censorship attacks this, subjective 
- Jurisdictional Diversity: Final boss is State. Social
- Staking Pools: incorporated in network states, not nation states
- Not your keys not your Attestations 
- Activist Staking: One place PoW loses to PoS, Affecting Recovery
  - in PoW can redirect hash rate
  - however in PoS 51%, deposits and censors exits 
  - Forking: social layer messy and slow, streamline via code, technical limitation, light clients need to observe Mempool, If offline, one cannot know if censoring in ongoing. Network noisy, Client bug
- Possible that retail staked to coinbase and then coinbase censoring, then coinbase gets slashed, but retail lost
- Inactivity Leak: Soft Fork, minority chain ignores attestations of attacker, accumulating inactivity penalty, Forced Exit, go through exit queue, 51% attacker exiting will take long time
- Slash 100%, but has to be an escalation process
- Maximally credibly neutral in forking strategy
